"Nitrates are widely used in anginal prophylaxis."
"In spite of the fact that the concept of nitrate tolerance was first put forward many years ago, the question of tolerance has remained controversial."
"There is widespread agreement that tolerance does occur to the effects of nitrates on arterial pressure."
"In contrast, tolerance to the venous and pulmonary effects is disputed."
"Similarly, the possibility of tolerance to the antianginal effects remains at issue."
"In this review, I discuss the factors which may have contributed to conflicting results in different studies, in particular recent findings on the rapidity of onset and reversal of tolerance."
"Tolerance develops rapidly on initiation of treatment and disappears equally rapidly on its discontinuation."
"In addition, tolerance appears to be a function of plasma nitrate profile."
"It is most likely to occur when plasma nitrate levels are constant and least likely when nitrate levels fluctuate."
"Furthermore, the provision of a daily nitrate free interval may protect against the development of tolerance."
"I then discuss the implications of these findings for patient management."
"They suggest that nitrate prophylaxis should not be used continuously, if this can be avoided."
"Rather, prophylaxis should be tailored to the individual to provide protection at times of maximum susceptibility, while allowing nitrate levels to fall at other times."
"The adequacy of antianginal protection with drug regimens incorporating a nitrate free interval requires further assessment."
"Similarly, the possibility that a nitrate free interval might lead to withdrawal effects and exacerbation of angina needs to be excluded."
"In the Griess reaction, first reported by Johann Peter Griess in 1879 as a method of analysis of nitrite (NO(2)(-)), nitrite reacts under acidic conditions with sulfanilic acid (HO(3)SC(6)H(4)NH(2)) to form a diazonium cation (HO(3)SC(6)H(4)-N[triple bond]N(+)) which subsequently couples to the aromatic amine 1-naphthylamine (C(10)H(7)NH(2)) to produce a red-violet coloured (lambda(max) approximately 540 nm), water-soluble azo dye (HO(3)SC(6)H(4)-NN-C(10)H(6)NH(2)). The identification of nitrite in saliva has been the first analytical application of this diazotization reaction in 1879."
"For a century, the Griess reaction has been exclusively used to identify analytically bacterial infection in the urogenital tract, i.e. to identify nitrite produced by bacterial reduction of nitrate (NO(3)(-)), the major nitrogen oxide anion in human urine."
"Since the discovery of the l-arginine/nitric oxide (l-Arg/NO) pathway in 1987, however, the Griess reaction is the most frequently used analytical approach to quantitate the major metabolites of NO, i.e. nitrite and nitrate, in a variety of biological fluids, notably blood and urine."
"The Griess reaction is specific for nitrite."
"Analysis of nitrate by this reaction requires chemical or enzymatic reduction of nitrate to nitrite prior to the diazotization reaction."
"The simplicity of the Griess reaction and its easy and inexpensive analytical feasibility has attracted the attention of scientists from wide a spectrum of disciplines dedicated to the complex and challenging L-Arg/NO pathway."
"Today, we know dozens of assays based on the Griess reaction."
"In principle, every laboratory in this area uses its own Griess assay."
"The simplest Griess assay is performed in batch commonly as originally reported by Griess."
"Because of the recognition of numerous interferences in the analysis of nitrite and nitrate in biological fluids and of the desire to analyze these anions simultaneously, the Griess reaction has been repeatedly modified and automated."
"In recent years, the Griess reaction has been coupled to HPLC, i.e. is used for post-column derivatization of chromatographically separated nitrite and nitrate."
"Such a HPLC-Griess system is even commercially available."
"The present article gives an overview of the currently available assays of nitrite and nitrate in biological fluids based on the Griess reaction."
"Special emphasis is given to human plasma and urine, to quantitative aspects, as well as to particular analytical and pre-analytical factors and problems that may be associated with and affect the quantitative analysis of nitrite and nitrate in these matrices by assays based on the Griess reaction."
"The significance of the Griess reaction in the L-Arg/NO pathway is appraised."
"Irregular and unknowingly use of chemical compounds is a serious threat to the environment, human health, and other living organisms attributable and intensified by the growing population and increasing demand for food."
"Nitrite and nitrate are among those compounds that are widely used in agricultural and industrial products."
"Therefore on-site, rapid, simple, and accurate monitoring of nitrite/nitrate is highly desirable."
"In this review, while emphasizing the importance of nitrite and nitrate in food chain safety and health of living organisms, their measurement methods, in particular, nanoplasmonic colorimetric sensors are comprehensively discussed based on the researches in this field."
"Nanoplasmonic-based sensors have proved to be successful in comparison with traditional methods due to their low cost, biocompatibility, high sensitivity and selectivity, and most importantly, the ability to visually detect and be used on-site to measure nitrite and nitrate."
"The design principle of nanoplasmonic sensors will be presented into two categories of aggregation- and etching-based detection followed by their applications in nitrite detection."
"The nitrate measurement will be discussed based on either direct detection of nitrate or indirect strategy in which nitrate is reduced to nitrite by enzymes or metals."
"Finally, the remaining challenges and prospects in this topic will be described and outlined."
"Nitrite and nitrate represent the final products of nitric oxide (NO) oxidation pathways, and their hematic concentrations are frequently assessed as an index of systemic NO production."
"However, their intake with food can influence their levels."
"Nitrite and nitrate could have a role by producing NO, because nitrite can release NO after reaction with deoxyhemoglobin and dietary nitrate can be reduced substantially to nitrite by commensal bacteria in the oral cavity."
"Different methods have been applied for nitrite/nitrate detection, with the most commonly used being the spectrophotometric assay based on the Griess reagent."
"However, a reference methodology for these determinations is still missing and many possible interferences have been reported."
"This chapter assesses how different experimental conditions can influence the results when detecting nitrite and nitrate in human plasma by the Griess assay and provides a simple method characterized by high reproducibility and minimized interferences by plasma constituents."
"Hypertension is a multifactorial disease associated with impaired nitric oxide (NO) production and bioavailability."
"In this respect, restoring NO activity by using nitrite and nitrate has been considered a potential therapeutic strategy to treat hypertension."
"This possibility is justified by the understanding that both nitrite and nitrate may be recycled back to NO and also promote the generation of other bioactive species."
"This process involves a complex biological circuit known as the enterosalivary cycle of nitrate, where this anion is actively taken up by the salivary glands and converted to nitrite by nitrate-reducing bacteria in the oral cavity."
"Nitrite is then ingested and reduced to NO and other nitroso species under the acid conditions of the stomach, whereas reminiscent nitrite that escapes gastric reduction is absorbed systemically and can be converted into NO by nitrite-reductases in tissues."
"While there is no doubt that nitrite and nitrate exert antihypertensive effects, several agents can impair the blood pressure responses to these anions by disrupting the enterosalivary cycle of nitrate."
"These agents include dietary and smoking-derived thiocyanate, antiseptic mouthwash, proton pump inhibitors, ascorbate at high concentrations, and xanthine oxidoreductase inhibitors."
"In this article, we provide an overview of the physiological aspects of nitrite and nitrate bioactivation and the therapeutic potential of these anions in hypertension."
"We also discuss mechanisms by which agents counteracting the antihypertensive responses to nitrite and nitrate mediate their effects."
"These critical aspects should be taken into consideration when suggesting nitrate or nitrite-based therapies to patients."